<!--
A new scriv changelog fragment.

Uncomment the section that is right (remove the HTML comment wrapper).
-->

### Contributers

- Kath Caley, massive contributions to the sequence annotation refactor!

### ENH

- Major rewrite of annotation handling! In short, we now use an in-memory SQlite
  database to store all annotations from data sources such as GFF or GenBank. New
  classes provide an interface to this database to support adding, querying records
  that match certain conditions. The new database is added to Sequence or Alignment
  instances on a `.annotation_db` attribute. When sequences are part of a collection
  (SequenceCollection or Alignment) they share the same data base. Features are now
  created on demand via the Sequence or Alignment instances and behave much as the
  original Annotatable classes did. There are notable exception to this, as
  outlined in the deprecated and discontinued sections.
  This approach brings a massive performance boost in terms of both speed and memory
  A microbial genome sequence and all it's annotates can be loaded in less than a second.

<!--
### BUG

- A bullet item for the BUG category.

-->
<!--
### DOC

- A bullet item for the DOC category.

-->
### Deprecations

- Every method that has "annotation" in it is now deprecated with a replacement
  indicated by their deprecation warnings. Typically, there's a new method with the
  name "feature" in it.

### Discontinued

- Backwards incompatible change! Sequence and Alignment no longer inherit from
  _Annotatable, so the methods and atributes from that mixin class are no longer
  available. (As there was no migration strategy, please let us know if it broke
  your code and need help in updating it.)
  
  Major differences include: the `.annotations` attribute is gone; individual
  annotations can no longer be copied; annotations are not updated on sequence
  operations (you need to re-query).

