<!--
A new scriv changelog fragment.

Uncomment the section that is right (remove the HTML comment wrapper).
-->


### Contributors

- @GavinHuttley


### ENH

- Implement plugin architecture for cogent3 sequence format parsers and
  writers. Third party parsers and writers can be added to the cogent3
  by creating a plugin. Parser plugin's must inherit from 
  `cogent3.parse.sequence.SequenceParserBase`. Writer plugins
  must inherit from `cogent3.format.sequence.SequenceWriterBase`. Look at
  the cogent3 pyproject.toml for the plugin entry points.
  We default to using third party plugins for the following formats,
  falling back to cogent3's internal plugins if no others are available.
- New type `SequenceCollection` and `Alignment` classes now have
  a public `name_map` property. This records the mapping between
  the sequence names in the collection and the names in the
  underlying seqsdata container. This is required for using annotations.
  The attribute is produced by the `rename_seqs()` method. `name_map`
  is an immutable dictionary.
- Added functions for describing and loading data sets that are now included
  with cogent3! The main brca1 alignment and associated Murphy tree are now
  included with the package. Use `cogent3.available_datasets()` and
  `cogent3.get_dataset()` to create the instances that use these.
- Added `duplicated_seqs()` method to new type SequenceCollection and Alignments.
  As the name implies, it identifies the names of sequences that are equal. On
  Alignments, the gapped sequence is used.

<!--
### BUG

- A bullet item for the BUG category.

-->
<!--
### DOC

- A bullet item for the DOC category.

-->
<!--
### Deprecations

- A bullet item for the Deprecations category.

-->

### Discontinued

- We have changed the API for the SupportsFeatures protocol. It no longer
  inherits from SerialisableType. Thus, subclasses of AnnotationDbABC no
  longer have to implement `to_rich_dict()`, `from_dict()` and
  `to_json()` methods.
- We have changed the API for AnnotationDbABC. The following methods
  have been converted from abstractmethods to concrete methods. The
  concrete methods raise a NotImplementedError. This means
  developers need not implement them in their subclasses. The methods are:
  - `add_feature()`
  - `add_records()`
  - `subset()`
  - `update()`
  - `union()`
- `cogent3.format.alignment` has been renamed `cogent3.format.sequence`.
  This is a backwards incompatible change!
- `cogent3.util.table` has been moved to `cogent3.core.table`. Usage of the
  top level functions for making, loading tables is unaffected.
